So I think to some degree the ethical
argument is a bit of a dead end, okay?
So I wanna focus on in
this introduction is
really that there are good
business reasons for
not resorting to these
kinds of dark patterns.
And those business reasons
in my opinion are far
more compelling than the ethical argument.
And so I know that this kind of
introduction, this first segment for
today is all quite theoretical, all right?
We haven't looked at any design yet,
we've not looked at any copy yet, or
anything like that.
But making a decision on your approach out
of the gate when you do things like this,
knowing how you're gonna approach it is so
fundamental to success with conversion and
the type of conversion
that you want to achieve.
So understanding where that
line is between what you
are willing to do to
encourage conversion and
what you're not willing to do is
a really important lying to walk.
You need to know where that is.
And so I think it's really important
you understand the consequences if
you start to stray into
the world of dark patterns.
So let's look at these
three business reasons.
Reason number 1 is a consumers
are cynical, savvy, and spoilt for choice.
So you remember that I mentioned
booking.com a minute ago.
So this is a screen grab from booking.com.
And it uses scarcity, right?
This idea that scares the primal brain,
the fact that something is gonna run out,
there's not gonna be enough resources,
okay?
So for example, it says, there's
only six rooms left on our site for
this, and this deal is gonna
expire in 11 hours, okay?
And 21 other people
are looking at this room.
All of those things are designed to
create a sense of panic in you, right?
That if you don't act soon,
you're gonna miss out on the opportunity.
First of all, let's make it clear.
This works without a doubt, right?
It will increase conversion rates, okay?
And manipulating people
in this way does work.
Yet, there were consequences for
it working.
And there is an assumption that people
often make that because it works,
therefore, users must be unaware
that they're being manipulated.
But that is actually not the case, okay?
System two, our conscious minds can be
completely aware of what's going on,
but being undermined in our decision
making, influence to know decision
making process by that older part of our
brain, that primal part of our brain.
And this came out in usability testing
that I've run on exactly this site, right?
So I decided to run some usability
testing to see how people responded
to booking.com and the process of booking.
And this is what one
user subjects said to me.
I hate all of this manipulative crap,
I don't know whether I'm allowed to
say that but that's what the guy said.
Trying to convince me the room is about to
sell out, I just ignore that stuff, right?
So the power of dark patterns isn't
that people don't aren't aware of them,
it's the fact that they think
they can ignore them, okay?
But in truth,
they're being influenced by them anyway.
So let's be clear, people know you're
attempting to manipulate them,
and that has big consequences.
Not only for which, over time,
you get to a situation where
people become increasingly
disgruntled about it.
There's more and more talk about it.
There's more and more complaints about it,
and it starts to have real impact.
It gets to the point where even government
bodies start to take awareness of this.
So the CMA in the UK are a consumer
rights body, government body.
And the CMA have taken enforcement action
to bring to an end misleading sales
tactics, hidden charges, and
other practices in the online
hotel booking market.
They might as well have said booking.com,
right?
These are wholly unacceptable.
So dark patterns have
long term consequences.
And if users are aware that
they're being manipulated,
you can alienate them very quickly,
and they can easily go elsewhere.
After all,
there are literally hundreds of thousands
of sites that offer hotel booking.
Now, you might go, well, hang on a minute,
booking.com is very successful.
So obviously, that's not the case there.
And as I did research into this,
I was discovering that actually
the reason people liked booking.com and
kept using booking.com was
because it was easy to use.
Because they knew it, they understood it,
because they've been using it before.
And so the success of
the site was despite the dark
patterns not because of them, okay?
People kept using it for other reasons,
other things they liked about the site.
And it's interesting to note that
the reason that they did keep using it was
still a psychological one.
It was easy.
They didn't have to think.
So it can get really quite interesting
quite quickly once we realize
that users are aware when we're
attempting to manipulate them.
Because we can quickly use them and
quickly alienate them.
And that can mean that you might get some
short-term improvements in conversion,
but long-term, you're gonna find
it increasingly difficult to
maintain those customer relationships.
Add to that, the one disgruntled customer
can seriously undermine a brand,
and you get into some real problem areas.
So I mean, the obvious power that
consumers now have is that they
can write reviews about you, right?
They can write reviews about
your products and services.
And when there's a lot of people that
feel that they're being manipulated,
that feel they're being tricked
into doing stuff, when they
start to come together and they start
to complain, it causes real problems.
So one of the great examples of this
happened all the way back in the late 90s,
where one blogger wrote a blog
post called My Del Hell,
about their terrible experience with Dell.
And that galvanized a community of other
people who've had terrible experiences,
and it knocked a third
off of Dell share price.
That's how big a difference this kind
of thing can make when you annoy your
potential customers or
your existing customers.
But even one customer in isolation
can cause all kinds of problems
if they're not happy.
Take the case of Hasan Syed, right?
He is my hero, this guy.
Hasan Syed had some problems
with British Airways.
I won't get into what they were,
it's somewhat irrelevant.
But he got so
annoyed with British Airways that he
decided to take out a promoted tweet.
Which meant that whenever anybody talked
about British Airways on Twitter,
when anybody mentioned British Airways,
they got back a promoted tweet that read,
don't fly with British Airways, their
customer experience is horrendous, okay?
Now, this got picked up by Mashable and
the other tech blogs, and
then it got picked up by the BBC and
Fox News and all of these news outlets.
And one upset client or
customer caused the major PR disaster.
So you walk a very dangerous line when you
start trying to manipulate your audience.
And you can get into
situations like Facebook have,
who were carrying out psychological
experiments on their user,
where they got called up in
front of Congress over this.
It can be an enormous problem.
But probably,
the biggest reason to avoid these kinds of
manipulative techniques
is buyer's remorse.
Because buyer's remorse costs
your business a lot more
than you think it does.
So let me give you a real
world example of this.
I worked with an e-commerce brand
that sold consumer electronics.
And one of their biggest
sellers was a kettle,
not exactly the most exciting thing in
the world, but it was their lead product.
And the ECOM team was under
increasing pressure to improve
their conversion rate or average order
value I think it was year on year.
Every year, they were expected to
increase it more and more and more.
And of course, that gets harder and
harder to do over time.
So they started turning to
dark patterns to do this.
And one of dark patterns that they
employed was automatically adding
kettle filters, this kettle had filters to
stop limescale building up or whatever.
And they would automatically add
someone to the basket, right?
And of course, people are lazy, and
they don't pay attention because
they rely on system one, right?
And so as a result, they would miss that,
and end up paying more than they thought
because they're getting these
kettle filters as well.
And of course, they were brand kettle
filters that were overpriced compared to
the off-brand ones that you
could pick up on Amazon.
So when I came in and I started working
with them, I kind of flagged this as
a potential issue, and they said,
yes, it was very successful,
we managed to increase our
order value quite considerably.
But as I began to investigate, I found
out that there were consequences to that.
And this happens all the time that when
you manipulate a customer into doing
something, they're obviously
not happy when they
eventually realize they've been tricked or
manipulated.
And that leads to hidden costs.
So the UX or ECOM team or whatever you
want to to call them, they were happy
because they'd improve their
conversion rate or average order value.
So they were over the moon.
But they weren't communicating with
the rest of the business very well.
And so you had the marketing department
that were actually finding it,
their marketing costs were going up,
they were having to do a lot more
in order to win new customers.
And when you did a little
bit of a search online,
you found out why the existing customers
were moaning about the company, and
about their manipulative techniques,
etcetera.
So there was a hidden cost there
of an increased marketing cost.
Add to that, there were also a lot of
people ringing up support and going, well,
hang on a minute,
I didn't order these filters.
Why have I been charged for these filters?
Now, the irony there is that every
time somebody called the call center,
it was costing £3.62 as I remember, okay?
The profit margin on the filters was
considerably less than that, right?
So they were actually losing
money as a company because so
many people were calling up saying,
hang on a minute,
I didn't order these filters,
I don't want these filters.
And then of course,
they have to be returned to restocked.
And so
the number of returns was increasing and
the administration of all of that.
So as you can see,
this kind of manipulation can really
backfire on you if you're not careful.
So all of that was really
a very long disclaimer, okay?
But hopefully, it's a disclaimer that it's
worthwhile to you, because the chances
are you come across people that wanna
do this kind of manipulative stuff.
And now, you've got a little bit
of an argument to take to them
as to why they shouldn't do it, that is
more than, well, it's just wrong, okay?
So I'm hoping you feel in a better
position to handle that kind of stuff.
But you wanna create sites for
your clients and
your stakeholders that do allow
people to increase conversion, right?
It does encourage action.
So what different psychological methods
can you use if you can't play off of
scarcity, if you can add things to people
shopping baskets, and all this stuff?
What can you do that makes a difference?
And these four psychological principles
are the ones that we're gonna be carrying
through for the rest of this course.